---
title: Exercise 09.01 Conda Environments in the Notebook Service
author: Ag Stephens, Daniel Westwood
---

# Exercise 09.01: Using Conda Environments in the Notebook Service

### Scenario

I want to install packages of my own choice into a virtual environment, and 
then run this as a kernel in the notebook service. The JASMIN Notebook Service:

- provides an interactive programming interface through a web browser
- includes a set of python libraries for data analysis
- can read directly from the CEDA Archive
- can include formatted documentation and visualisations within a Notebook
- will enable you to use virtual environments from a local directory.

### Objectives

After completing this exercise I will be able to:

- create a conda environment
- install the `ipykernel` module and set up my environment as a kernel for the notebook service.
- access my kernel to apply to a specific notebook.
- run the notebook to produce some outputs. Examples:
    - create visualisations in a notebook
    - write outputs to the JASMIN file system
    - add inline annotations to a notebook

### Steps

#### 0. Conda setup

If you have not created an environment using conda before, please see the JASMIN documentation at https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/docs/software-on-jasmin/creating-and-using-miniforge-environments/ for help getting started. This includes `Obtaining miniforge - installer` and `Creating and activating a base environment`.
From here we will be creating a `sub-environment` to use for a specific project. 

#### 1. Creating a new environment

Assuming you have followed the Conda setup steps detailed above, we can now create a `sub-environment` to use for a specific project.

```
$ conda create -n myenv

Retrieving notices: ...working... done
Channels:
 - conda-forge
Platform: linux-64
Collecting package metadata (repodata.json): done
Solving environment: done

Preparing transaction: done
Verifying transaction: done
Executing transaction: done
```

You may also be asked to proceed by entering yes/no, but you can specify not to ask when creating the env using the `-y` flag:
```
$ conda create -n myenv -y
```

NOTE: You may need to initialise the base conda environment and tell conda what shell you're using. You can do this using the following:
```
$ conda init bash
```
If you're creating environments on your own device you may need to check what type of shell you're using (E.g for Mac, the default is zsh)


We will then need to activate our environment using:
```
$ conda activate myenv
(myenv) $
```

We can now see that whatever environment is currently loaded is shown in brackets. We can use `conda deactivate` to exit this environment at any time.

#### 2. Installing packages

We can install specific packages into the environment with conda using the `conda-forge` channel. Note that we must specify the channel to install the package from, or conda might use the `default` channel from Anaconda which is now a paid service (not supported on JASMIN!). For example, we can install a specific version of xarray. Conda will install this package plus several dependencies, including python-3.12.7 for this set of libraries.

```
(myenv) $ conda install -c conda-forge xarray dask -y
```

We can also install packages into a conda environment using pip:
```
(myenv) $ pip install cfapyx
```
This command will install the latest version of an xarray add-on engine called CFAPyX using the `pip` package manager. 
You can verify this has worked by opening a python shell with `python` and doing:

```
import xarray as xr
xr.backends.list_engines()
```

If the `CFA` engine is listed here then your installation has worked, otherwise you may still be using the Jaspy environment without knowing. You can unload this module using `module unload jaspy` and trying again with your environment.

#### 3. Install ipykernel and set up the kernel

Jupyter notebooks use a different type of programming environments called `kernels` which you can read more about in the Jupyter documentation at https://docs.jupyter.org/en/stable/projects/kernels.html, but essentially it means our conda environment is not automatically recognised by Jupyter as a valid environment. We need to install a package called `ipykernel` and then register our environment with Jupyter as a valid environment. 

```
(myenv) $ conda install -c conda-forge ipykernel
...
(myenv) $ python -m ipykernel install --user --name=myenv
```

This will now register our environment as a kernel that the notebook service can use, and it should now appear on the dropdown for available kernels on a notebook, and in the `new tab` window when creating a new notebook.